=== PAGE 1 ===
A New Look
At General Education
Minerva Project Insights September 2024
An Excerpt from Building the Intentional University (MIT Press, 2017)
=== PAGE 2 ===
2
Minerva Project Insights A New Look at General Education
©2024 Minerva Project, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Contents
Introduction
The Minerva Model
    Learning objectives and assessment
    Using Big Questions to organize content
    Command central: The curriculum map
How We Met Common Challenges
    Lack of rigor/watered down courses
    Troubled leadership and reform
    Who can or should teach
    Multidisciplinary or transdisciplinary knowledge
Conclusion
3
4
6
8
9
10
11
13
15
15
17
=== PAGE 3 ===
3
Minerva Project Insights A New Look at General Education
©2024 Minerva Project, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
When we built our first and flagship  
partner, Minerva University, we wrote a 
book, Building the Intentional University 
(MIT Press, 2017), detailing exactly how 
we did it—from curricular philosophy to 
pedagogical science, and everything 
in between. It captured the core of our 
pioneering approach to higher education, 
and we demonstrated how it can be 
achieved. While the world has since 
dramatically shifted, our educational 
approach was ahead of its time—it was 
designed to help institutions navigate 
systemic challenges and prepare  
learners to thrive post-graduation.  
We have selected chapter excerpts  
that we believe will help leaders  
transform their institutions. 
In this chapter, we delve deep into  
how we redesigned the general  
education curriculum.
=== PAGE 4 ===
4
Minerva Project Insights A New Look at General Education
©2024 Minerva Project, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
What we teach in our general  
education program is a set of 
habits of mind and foundational 
concepts—the HCs1—that span 
four core competencies: thinking 
critically, thinking creatively, 
communicating effectively, and 
interacting effectively. This material 
is structured in a particular way, 
which constitutes our general 
education program.
We think of the HCs as constituting 
not so much a set of things that 
everyone ought to know but rather 
a set of tools that everyone ought 
to use—something akin to a basic 
cognitive operating system. Our 
aim is to anchor these tools so 
robustly in the minds of our students 
that they reach for them and apply 
them in all relevant contexts, 
quickly and naturally. As with the 
acquisition of any kind of expertise, 
this requires a process that begins 
with conscious deliberation and 
continues with spaced practice in 
a variety of contexts, so that is how 
we teach: we introduce the HCs 
explicitly (each habit or concept has 
a hashtag name, e.g., #rightproblem, 
and accompanying explanatory 
text; we assign relevant readings 
and other materials accompanied 
by study guides; we meet in small, 
live seminars to practice applying 
the habit or concept in real-world 
contexts, to explore its subtleties 
and address confusions; and we  
ask students to exercise their 
nascent skills in independent or 
team-based assignments.
The principles from the science of 
learning (see chapter 11)2 clearly 
point away from lecture and 
The Minerva Model
W e ensure that all students are engaged at least 75 
percent of the time—and that is what we mean by 
fully active learning.
=== PAGE 5 ===
5
Minerva Project Insights A New Look at General Education
©2024 Minerva Project, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
toward practice using the material, 
so that is how we organize our 
sessions; moreover, we ensure that 
all students are engaged at least 
75 percent of the time—and that 
is what we mean by fully active 
learning (see chapter 12)2. Minerva 
seminars always center on thinking 
things through, making connections, 
and practicing skills. Only rarely—
probably less than 5 percent of the 
total time spent in class—do they 
include explicit instructions for 
information transfer.
TABLE 1 
Key Features of Our General Education Program
All first-year students take the same four courses, called the “cornerstones” (these 
are described in detail in chapters 5–8)2. Each course lasts the whole freshman year.
Across the cornerstones, there are approximately 115 learning objectives
(HCs) spanning the four core competencies.
Each HC has its own 5-point mastery rubric. Rubric scores are the primary
determinants of overall course grade.
The HCs are illustrated with content from multiple domains, driven  
by Big Questions. (see page 8).
HC assessment continues in every course throughout the college career;
freshman grades are continuously updated on this basis.
=== PAGE 6 ===
6
Minerva Project Insights A New Look at General Education
©2024 Minerva Project, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
The core implementation details 
for this overarching plan are 
summarized in table 1. In their first 
year, all students take the same 
four “cornerstone” courses, each 
one introducing approximately thirty 
HCs. The academic calendar is such 
that this means that a new habit 
of mind or foundational concept is 
introduced in approximately half the 
class sessions. The remainder of 
the sessions are either continuation 
days—needed for particularly 
rich HCs—or synthesis days, on 
which bundles of HCs are applied 
in combination. It is rare for more 
than one habit or concept to be 
introduced on a single day, but this 
does occur occasionally, especially 
when two HCs are in some sense 
different sides of the same coin.
We focus on formative rather than 
summative assessment (i.e., we 
prioritize low-stakes feedback 
provided in the early and middle 
stages of learning over high-stakes 
Learning objectives  
and assessment
exam scores arriving at the end) 
and are intensely concerned with 
transparency and reliability in this 
process. For this reason, every one 
of the HCs has its own five-point 
mastery rubric, each derived from 
a common template (see table 2). 
Students receive HC rubric scores 
on in-class contributions and formal 
assignments, the latter of which are 
assigned weights according to their 
difficulty or importance.
To ensure that students’ commitment 
to general education goals remains 
firm throughout their time at Minerva, 
we have implemented what might be 
most naturally thought of as “time-
traveling” grades. In sophomore and 
later years, students receive grades 
for the learning outcomes related 
to course content and grades 
related to their use of relevant HCs. 
HC grades from later years are 
more heavily weighted than those 
from the first year, so students are 
incentivized to demonstrate and 
improve their mastery continually. At 
graduation, the letter grade for each 
cornerstone course—a function of 
the accumulated grades for all the 
HCs it introduced—is finally locked 
in, representing each student’s 
ability in each of the four core 
competencies as evinced over their 
entire college career.
W e have implemented what 
might be most naturally thought 
of as “time-traveling” grades.
=== PAGE 7 ===
7
Minerva Project Insights A New Look at General Education
©2024 Minerva Project, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
TABLE 2 
Mastery Rubric T emplate
Rubric score
Lacks knowledge
Superficial 
knowledge
Knowledge
Deep knowledge
Profound knowledge
Description
Does not recall or use the learning outcome when prompted or 
does so mostly or entirely inaccurately.
Recalls or uses the learning outcome only somewhat accurately, by 
partially quoting, paraphrasing, summarizing, outlining or applying it, 
or recalls or uses the skill or concept in ways that fail to address the 
relevant problems or goals.
Accurately recalls, uses, paraphrases, summarizes, outlines, or 
reproduces standard or straightforward examples of the learning 
outcome and does so in a way that addresses the relevant problems 
or goals.
Demonstrates a deeper grasp of the learning outcome by explaining it, 
using it to produce a sophisticated, nonstandard example, differentiating 
component parts, or applying critical distinctions, or by analyzing 
relationships between component parts.
Uses the learning outcome in a creative way, relying on a novel 
perspective (i.e., not one that was in course materials or is easily 
located in the relevant literature) to: improve an existing problem-solving 
technique or create a more effective one; devise a more elegant or 
beautiful solution than the standard; or produce an unusually clever and 
effective application.
Throughout this process, students 
are frequently reminded of their 
mastery of the general education 
goals. The Active Learning Forum’s 
dashboard (see chapters 15 and 16)2 
displays each student’s changing 
scores across the entire set of 
HCs. These can easily be sorted 
according to either course of 
introduction or core competence. 
A summary report at the core-
competence level also appears on 
term reports, and we have plans 
to include it as an option on per-
student customizable employer-
facing CVs.
1
2
3
4
5
=== PAGE 8 ===
8
Minerva Project Insights A New Look at General Education
©2024 Minerva Project, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Using Big Questions to 
organize content
We realized early that even if one 
wishes to focus on transferable 
skills and knowledge rather than 
overt knowledge of specific content, 
one still must establish some kind 
of organizational scheme for the 
content. There are several good 
ways of doing this, but earlier 
work (Fost, 2013) suggested a 
natural solution: use so-called Big 
Questions. The idea came from a 
recommendation by the Association 
of American Colleges and 
Universities (2007) that curricula 
should “engage the big questions”  
by “[teaching] through the 
curriculum to far-reaching issues, 
contemporary and enduring, in 
science and society, cultures and 
values, global interdependence, 
the changing economy, and human 
dignity and freedom.”
The advantages of this approach are 
clear. First, by associating questions 
with instructional units—that is, 
natural groupings of HCs—that 
last two to three weeks, we ensure 
that the subject matter for a certain 
course will remain relatively stable. 
This strategy decreases the time 
and effort required to learn content 
related to a narrow domain and keep 
it in mind long enough to participate 
in classwork, only to discard it and 
repeat the process with another 
subject. Minerva students spend 
correspondingly more effort focusing 
on the HCs rather than on frequently 
changing content incidental to the 
learning objectives. 
Second, the questions provide real-
world domains of application. The 
first of these is the Big Question 
associated with the unit in which 
the habit of mind or foundational 
concept is introduced. Later in the 
course, however, synthesis lessons 
bundle several HCs and apply 
them anew to a different question. 
This can occur multiple times 
within a course, or even between 
courses. For example, the Big 
Questions “How can we feed the 
world?” and “Can war be avoided?,” 
among others, appear in several 
cornerstone courses. This approach 
harmonizes with several principles 
from the science of learning (see 
chapter 11)2, including spaced 
practice, interleaving, and building  
on prior associations.
This strategy decreases the  
time and effort required to learn  
content related to a narrow  
domain and keep it in mind  
long enough to participate in  
classwork, only to discard it  
and repeat the process with  
another subject.
=== PAGE 9 ===
9
Minerva Project Insights A New Look at General Education
©2024 Minerva Project, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Command central:  
The curriculum map
To see the cornerstone courses 
under even greater magnification, 
let’s examine a small piece of what 
we call the curriculum map. This 
map shows, for all four freshman 
year long courses, which learning 
objectives will be addressed 
and when, using content from a 
particular Big Question. The excerpt 
shown (see table 3) is from the first 
two weeks, fall semester, of the 
Empirical Analyses course.
Each row in the “HC(s) introduced” 
column in table 3 represents a 
single class session. Thus the first 
session of the Problem Solving 
unit introduces the habit of mind 
#selflearning, which is about 
techniques to facilitate self-study 
and unsupervised learning. In the 
next two sessions, four more HCs 
are introduced. Readings for all five 
relate either to the HCs themselves 
or to some aspect of the Big 
Question that will permit illustrations 
of its application. For example, in 
session 3 of this unit, students might 
read an article about how a nonprofit 
group approached providing 
agricultural assistance to an 
underdeveloped country. The study 
guide for that reading might ask 
students to focus on how the group 
used gap analysis (the focus of the 
#gapanalysis foundational concept) 
to determine which elements of 
the problem could be addressed 
with existing tools and which 
elements required new solutions. 
In class, students might share their 
understanding of this process, then 
work in groups to apply gap analysis 
to a slightly new problem, still related 
to the same Big Question, “How can 
we feed the world?”
TABLE 3 
Excerpt from the Curriculum Map Showing the First Two Weeks of Empirical Analyses Course
Big Question
How can we feed 
the world?
Unit
Problem Solving
HC(s) introduced
#selflearning
#rightproblem; #breakitdown
#gapanalysis; #constraints
 
Synthesis: #rightproblem, 
#breakitdown, #gapanalysis, 
#constraints
=== PAGE 10 ===
10
Minerva Project Insights A New Look at General Education
©2024 Minerva Project, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
How We Met  
Common Challenges
In the scholarly fora of general 
education—places like the pages of 
The Journal of General Education—
discussions of curriculum structure 
are often accompanied by others 
equally important: those concerning 
implementation. In this section 
Lack of rigor/
watered-down 
courses
Challenge How We Overcame
OVERCOMING COMMON CHALLENGES
Troubled 
leadership  
and reform
All students take the same courses in the first year and are assessed 
on the HCs throughout their undergraduate career.
Big Questions function as cross-course bonds,  explicit demonstrations 
that a single real-world problem typically requires the synthesis of 
ideas from different core competencies.
Faculty performance is measured first and foremost by professors’ 
successful teaching, rather than research.
All faculty teach a cornerstone course at least once and receive more 
than a month of training, which includes the science of learning and 
pedagogical best practices.
I review some of the ways that 
we either avoided or overcame 
structural and sociopolitical 
challenges faced elsewhere. As 
maps of the terrain, I will use Zai 
(2015) and Newton (2000). 
•
•
•
•
Who can or 
should teach
A team approach is adopted where all faculty teaching interdisciplinary 
courses receive lesson plans and are accompanied by a subject matter 
specialist prior to teaching.
Standardized lesson plans are written by a core team of 
interdisciplinary faculty.
•
•
Multidisciplinary  
or  
transdisciplinary 
knowledge
We deemphasize, in our general education curriculum, knowledge 
acquisition and instead favor teaching habits of mind and foundational 
concepts that either help produce knowledge or help students deploy 
knowledge in the service of a goal.
•
=== PAGE 11 ===
11
Minerva Project Insights A New Look at General Education
©2024 Minerva Project, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
One set of challenges concerns 
academic standards and rigor. 
Sometimes these challenges 
have to do with the coherence 
and conceptual unity of the 
curriculum itself, or the degree to 
which curricular rigor is enforced 
by an intellectual community that 
shares a “language of ideas” and 
a commitment to policing the 
integrity of those ideas. Other 
concerns center on delivery: general 
education classes are commonly 
taught in large classrooms and by 
the least expensive (and often least 
experienced) faculty.
Regarding coherence, we focus 
on two specific issues. The first is 
interpersonal, namely, the extent 
to which one can say something 
definite about the recipient of 
a degree. One of the historical 
purposes of general education 
programs was to establish a 
standard level of competence and 
knowledge that every graduate 
would achieve. Prospective 
employers are interested in that, 
but so are current and prospective 
students. In this sense, the Minerva
program coheres because 
everyone takes the same courses 
in the first year and continues to be 
assessed on the HCs throughout 
their undergraduate career. The 
cornerstone course grades that 
appear on a student’s transcript 
guarantee that external audiences, 
and the students themselves, can 
compare student ability in the four 
high-level core competencies.
Another key issue regarding 
coherence is cross-course 
synthesis, or the degree to which 
the curriculum itself hangs together. 
This concern has a history dating 
These questions function as cross-course bonds,  
explicit demonstrations that a single real-world  
problem typically requires the synthesis of ideas  
from different core competencies. 
01
Lack of rigor/watered-  
down courses
=== PAGE 12 ===
12
Minerva Project Insights A New Look at General Education
©2024 Minerva Project, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
cornerstone (eight total), combining 
them into a coherent approach 
to their chosen topic. Students 
complete two of these projects, one 
in fall semester and another in spring 
semester, and this work is the most 
heavily weighted when we calculate 
the students’ HC grades. Last, as 
students progress through the 
year, they employ HCs introduced 
in one cornerstone course across 
the other cornerstone courses 
on a regular basis. In fact, there 
are sections in some cornerstone 
courses that cannot be taught—at 
least not optimally—without students 
having taken segments of other 
cornerstone courses.
The remainder of the academic 
standards concerns have already 
been addressed elsewhere in this 
chapter, if implicitly. Conceptual unity 
arises from how we have organized 
the HCs into core competencies 
(see chapter 2)2. There is certainly 
an intellectual community for the 
HCs, in the sense of a group of 
people who share a language of 
ideas and attend assiduously to 
one another’s use of them. One 
of the requirements for a habit or 
concept is that there be a scholarly 
literature about it, but in many ways 
we are creating a new community 
for whom this structure will become 
a touchstone. The appellation 
process, that is, the granting of 
a hashtag name for a habit or a 
back to about 1820 (Boning, 2007), 
which was when classical liberal arts 
programs began to meet competition 
from programs (such as those at 
Bowdoin, Brown, or Michigan) that 
offered more individualized pathways 
to help students prepare for specific 
vocations. The Minerva approach 
to this issue is multifaceted. 
As mentioned above, some Big 
Questions appear in multiple 
courses. “Can war be avoided?” 
is one example. These questions 
function as cross-course bonds, 
The granting of a hashtag  
name for a habit or a concept, 
provides that community with  
a common language.
explicit demonstrations that a single 
real-world problem typically requires 
the synthesis of ideas from different 
core competencies. Another way 
we achieve the same end is through 
our use of final project assignments. 
Final projects consume the last 
week of each cornerstone course 
and require students to invoke 
at least two HCs from each 
=== PAGE 13 ===
13
Minerva Project Insights A New Look at General Education
©2024 Minerva Project, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
02
Troubled leadership  
and reform
concept, provides that community 
with a common language. Indeed, 
even after our first year of teaching, 
and more so now after three years 
of student enrollment, it is common 
to hear HCs dropped by name into 
casual conversation.
The integrity of the proper 
application of these concepts and 
habits is facilitated by scoring 
rubrics, which detail exactly what 
we say it means to apply a concept 
poorly or well, and our explicit 
definitions, which are displayed 
prominently on the Active Learning 
Forum. There is very little room 
for hand waving about any habit 
or concept; indeed, our sharpest 
students have helped draw attention 
to vagaries in some of our early 
definitions, prompting revision  
or correction. 
EXAMPLE 
Hashtag Names in a Skills Taxonomy
Competency Sub-Competencies HCs
Zai reports, with concern, that 
when programmatic reform is led 
by tenured faculty, these individuals 
tend to be more committed 
to their disciplines, or even to 
communities outside the university 
(such as professional societies), 
than to general education. They 
also tend to be unfamiliar with 
the relevant literature. At Minerva, 
we have intentionally avoided the 
incentive structures that at many 
institutions push faculty toward 
research and away from teaching. 
In the first place, we don’t use 
publication quotas or impact 
factors to determine professorial 
retention or advancement. Faculty 
research is encouraged and 
=== PAGE 14 ===
14
Minerva Project Insights A New Look at General Education
©2024 Minerva Project, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
supported, especially to the degree 
that it can include students as 
authentic contributors, but it is not 
the centerpiece of professorial 
success. Research is also so heavily 
incentivized within the broader 
profession that additional pressure 
imposed by the institution seems 
counterproductive. Second, and 
related, faculty performance is 
measured first and foremost by 
professors’ successful discharge of 
instructional duties—this is why we 
say that we are student-outcome-
centric. The general education 
courses are treated no differently 
in this regard from the disciplinary 
courses within the colleges. Finally, 
all our faculty currently teach a 
cornerstone course at least once 
and receive more than a month of 
training, which includes extensive 
sections on the science of learning, 
pedagogical best practices, and our 
general education curriculum.
Zai also reports that lack of 
academic rigor in some programs 
may have an organizational cause, 
namely, the low esteem general 
education holds in the eyes of the 
university’s power elite. This is not 
a concern at Minerva. The primary 
architects of our program are the 
founder and the chief academic 
officer, who developed these plans 
in full view of the board of directors 
and the funding bodies. It was not 
merely that these entities approved 
of the program incidentally, it was 
that the program was a central 
reason for their endorsing the  
overall academic mission.
Another advantage we have 
with respect to reform is that we 
are developing our curriculum 
sequentially, from the freshman year 
forward. Because the freshman 
year is entirely focused on general 
education, to prove we were 
delivering on our promises we had to 
do our best work on those courses. 
There simply was no other university 
activity to showcase. 
Faculty performance is measured first and 
foremost by professors’ successful discharge of 
instructional duties—this is why we say that we 
are student-outcome-centric.
=== PAGE 15 ===
15
Minerva Project Insights A New Look at General Education
©2024 Minerva Project, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Each of the cornerstones is 
interdisciplinary, so it is rare for 
any individual instructor to be 
thoroughly familiar with all the 
material in it—either the HCs or the 
Big Questions. To support them, we 
hold weekly hour-long meetings with 
all instructors who are teaching a 
given course at that time. Prior to the 
meeting the instructors review the 
lesson plans to be used two weeks 
hence, and in the hour allotted they 
work through any unfamiliar material 
or pedagogical concerns. Although 
the lesson plans are already 
complete and highly polished by the 
time the instructional faculty receive 
them, they are flexible enough to 
accommodate new suggestions 
and approaches. Also attending the 
meeting is a specialist—the same 
person for all four courses—whose 
role is to help each teaching team 
understand how its class relates to 
the other three. That person also 
passes along institutional memories 
as needed, including common 
confusions, best practices for 
certain topics, and the like. In some 
cases the dean of the college also 
attends these meetings.
The team-based approach is also 
used to develop the lesson plans in 
the first place. That development 
was managed by experienced 
interdisciplinary educators and the 
lesson plans were heavily edited. 
Altogether, approximately 3,400 
04
Multidisciplinary or 
transdisciplinary knowledge
On the matter of whether general 
education ought to include 
knowledge within multiple subjects 
or knowledge that transcends 
subjects, our choice has by now 
become clear: we deemphasize, in 
our general education curriculum, 
knowledge acquisition—that is, 
knowledge in the sense of a codified 
set of justified, true beliefs—and 
instead favor teaching habits of 
mind and foundational concepts 
pages of curriculum were written 
and reviewed by a team of eight 
to fifteen people over the course 
of two years. By using such a 
cross-disciplinary team to develop 
standardized lesson plans, we 
further mitigated the impact of any 
given professor’s particular training. 
Nevertheless, the lesson plans 
are written in a way that allows 
us to capitalize on that training: a 
portion of every lesson plan is left 
completely free so that the class can 
explore particularly fruitful student 
questions or issues that many
of them found confusing. In these 
moments, some professors’ 
expertise will come to the fore. 
Critically, we use the weekly 
meetings to capture their handling 
of the situation and add it as an 
annotation to the lesson plan so that 
future students and instructors can 
benefit from it.
03
Who can or should teach
=== PAGE 16 ===
16
Minerva Project Insights A New Look at General Education
©2024 Minerva Project, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
(see chapter 2)2 that either help 
produce knowledge or help students 
deploy knowledge in the service of 
a goal. Consider, for example, the 
nine-week-long Scientific Method 
unit in Empirical Analyses or the 
Leadership and Teamwork unit 
(also nine weeks long) in Complex 
Systems. The learning objectives 
in these units include, respectively, 
HCs such as #plausibility, which is 
about the process of determining the 
internal and external consistency of 
a hypothesis, and #powerdynamics, 
which is about types of power and 
different ways and consequences 
of wielding it. We assign readings 
from the scholarly literature on these 
topics, but our goal is not to ensure 
that students remember the content 
of these readings. Even if that were 
our purpose, the brutal fact is that 
they would not remember much of it, 
as the evidence of multiple studies 
on higher education show. Instead, 
our purpose is to instill a habit of 
W e deemphasize, in our general education  
curriculum, knowledge acquisition... and instead  
favor teaching habits of mind and foundational  
concepts that either help produce knowledge  
or help students deploy knowledge in the  
service of a goal.
mind—that is, a regular practice that 
becomes automatic in the relevant 
contexts—or to teach a foundational 
concept that helps make sense of 
a problem. This aim is supported 
by the rubrics, which move quickly 
past mere demonstration of 
knowledge and toward competent 
praxis. A student cannot achieve 
mastery or receive an A grade by 
regurgitating information in an exam 
booklet: we have no exams in these 
courses. Rather, the student must 
deploy the skill or concept in the 
contexts it is needed, which are 
likely to be classes that have nothing 
whatever to do with their original 
context. Those classes, and those 
contexts, may occur years after the 
#plausibility habit was introduced. 
Thanks to our time-traveling 
grades and Active Learning Forum 
dashboard, the enduring importance 
of these general education goals 
remains in focus throughout 
students’ college careers.
=== PAGE 17 ===
17
Minerva Project Insights A New Look at General Education
©2024 Minerva Project, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Conclusion
“
I conclude with a view expressed by 
Clifford (1877), written at a time—
perhaps not coincidentally—when 
the diversity of views about general 
education was in its first flush.
The student who begins to learn 
about electricity is not asked to 
believe in Ohm’s law: he is made 
to understand the question, he is 
placed before the apparatus, and 
he is taught to verify it. He learns 
to do things, not to think he 
knows things; to use instruments 
and to ask questions, not to 
accept a traditional statement ... . 
If Ohm’s law were suddenly lost 
and forgotten by all men, while 
the question and the method of 
solution remained, the result 
could be rediscovered in an  
hour. But the result by itself,  
if known to a people who could 
not comprehend the value of the 
question or the means of solving 
it, would be like a watch in the 
hands of a savage who could not 
wind it up ... . In regard, then, to 
the sacred tradition of humanity, 
we learn that it consists, not 
in propositions or statements 
which are to be accepted and 
believed on the authority of 
the tradition, but in questions 
rightly asked, in conceptions 
which enable us to ask further 
questions, and in methods of  
answering questions.
=== PAGE 18 ===
18
Minerva Project Insights A New Look at General Education
©2024 Minerva Project, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Written by Joshua Fost
Design and Layout by Laura Galvin
Association of American Colleges and Universities. (2007). College learning for the new global century. 
Washington, DC: Association of American Colleges and Universities.
Boning, K. (2007). Coherence in general education: A historical look. Journal of General Education, 56(1), 
1–16.
Brint, S., Proctor, K., Murphy, S. P., Turk-Bicakci, L., & Hanneman, R. A. (2009). General education models: 
Continuity and change in the U.S. undergraduate curriculum, 1975–2000. Journal of Higher Education, 
80(6), 605–642.
Clifford, W. (1877). The ethics of belief. Contemporary Review (London, England) , 29, 289–309.
Dunbar, R. I. M. (1992). Neocortex size as a constraint on group size in primates. Journal of Human 
Evolution, 22(6), 469–493. doi:10.1016/0047-2484(92)90081-J
Fost, J. (2013). Semantic technology and the question-centric curriculum. Innovative Higher Education, 
38(1), 31–44. doi:10.1007/s10755-012-9219-y
Newton, R. R. (2000). Tensions and models in general education planning. Journal of General Education, 
49(3), 165–181.
Zai, R. (2015). Reframing general education. Journal of General Education, 64(3), 196–217. doi:10.1353/
jge.2015.0022
On the Cover: A vortex of books represent 
a shift from traditional knowledge silos to 
modern wisdom’s light.  
 
Photo by Maxence Pira 
unsplash.com/@maxence_pira
Acknowledgments
Building the Intentional University can 
be purchased at: https://mitpress.
mit.edu/9780262536196/building-
the-intentional-university/
For more on this or our partnerships, 
contact us at: info@minervaproject.com
References
Endnotes
1Habits of Mind and Foundational Concepts is a Minerva term that designates the cognitive skills that 
with practice come to be triggered automatically (“habits of mind”); and fundamental knowledge that 
is broadly applicable (“foundational concepts”). In depth definition and analysis of these concepts 
can be found in chapter 2 of the book, Building the Intentional University (MIT Press, 2017).
2Refers to the full original publication, Building the Intentional University (MIT Press, 2017).
=== PAGE 19 ===
www.minervaproject.com