=== PAGE 1 ===
An Introduction to 
Habits of Mind and 
Foundational Concepts
Academics
=== PAGE 2 ===
2
T
he Minerva curriculum is designed to help our students become leaders, 
innovators, broad and adaptive thinkers, and global citizens. Our learning 
objectives are informed by the literatures on leadership and creativity, as 
well as on interviews and surveys of large employers in a variety of disciplines. These 
data have led us to define four types of core competencies the students should develop 
in order to become successful leaders, innovators, and broad, adaptive thinkers in 
a wide variety of disciplines. T wo of these competences focus on types of personal 
abilities: thinking critically (evaluating claims, analyzing inferences, weighing 
decisions, and analyzing problems) and thinking creatively (facilitating discovery, 
solving problems, and creating products, processes and services). The other two 
of these competencies focus on types of interpersonal abilities: communicating 
effectively (using language effectively, using nonverbal communication effectively) 
and interacting effectively (negotiating, mediating, and persuading; working 
effectively with others; resolving ethical dilemmas, and having social consciousness).
In the early twentieth century, “Great Books Programs” were popular — but 
there are too many books and too many questions about how to select them, 
and such programs waned. Instead, we have adopted a “Great Cognitive Tools 
Program”: We explicitly teach students the Habits of Mind (cognitive skills 
that come to be triggered automatically, with practice) and Foundational 
Concepts (fundamental knowledge that is broadly applicable) that foster each 
aspect of thinking critically, thinking creativity, communicating effectively 
and interacting effectively; we do not simply hope that such key skills and 
knowledge will be incidentally acquired as students learn other material.
The Habits of Mind and Foundational Concepts (HCs) are introduced 
during the first year, when all students take four, year-long Cornerstone 
seminars: Formal Analyses (which focuses on core aspects of thinking 
critically), Empirical Analyses (which focuses on core aspects of thinking 
creatively), Multimodal Communication (which focuses on core aspects of 
communicating effectively) and Complex Systems (which focuses on core 
aspects of interacting effectively). This material is then used (and assessed) 
during the subsequent three years while students major in specific subjects.
Introduction to HCs
Overview
=== PAGE 3 ===
3
To be included in the curriculum, a Habit of Mind (H) or Foundational  
Concept (C) must: 
1. be derived from an aspect of one of the four core competencies noted above; 
2. lead students to be able to do something useful in ordinary life after 
graduation (specialized knowledge comes later in the curriculum);
3. be broadly applicable, as indicated by the fact that it is used in courses  
offered in at least two of Minerva’s majors;
4. be justified either by empirical findings, proofs, or well-established  
best practices--particularly those that support functioning ethically in a 
global context; and
5. lead to specific behaviors that can be evaluated with rubrics; the HC cannot  
be so general or vague that it cannot be systematically and reliably evaluated.
What follows is one example of each major category of HC. There are more 
than 100 of these HCs, which are roughly equally distributed over the four core 
competencies. Each HC is the learning objective of a class session. In some cases, 
two or even three sessions are devoted to a single HC (based on how difficult it 
is), and in some cases we introduce two highly related HCs at the same time (e.g., 
those dealing with payoff matrices and game theory). The set of HCs is adjusted 
each year, based on our feedback from students, faculty, and employers.
Each HC is accompanied by a rubric, which indicates how the students will 
be graded on their use of that HC. The rubrics span a grade of “1” (indicating 
that the student did not understand the material) to “5” (indicating 
that the student understood it deeply and applied it in novel ways), with 
intermediate scores indicating intermediate levels of mastery. All class 
interactions and class assignments are graded using these rubrics. 
All HCs are introduced during the first year, but graded during the 
subsequent three years. In fact, the grades at the end of the first year 
are provisional; they are adjusted up or down each semester, depending 
on how well the student used the material in subsequent classes.
Introduction to HCs
Overview
=== PAGE 4 ===
4
After each paragraph that describes the H or C is an example 
of how that skill or knowledge can be applied in life after college. 
We also indicate in which course it is introduced:
 
CS = Introduced in Complex Systems
EA = Introduced in Empirical Analyses
FA = Introduced in Formal Analyses
MC = Introduced in Multimodal Communications
Introduction to HCs
Overview
=== PAGE 5 ===
5
A. Evaluating Claims
One aspect of critical thinking focuses on evaluating claims, which requires 
identifying them and their components. In order to do this, one must rely on the 
ability to check whether conclusions are plausible and must use principles of 
information literacy. In addition, one often must recognize whether claims are 
grounded in sound science and supported by probability and statistics.
#estimation FA Use estimation techniques to determine whether 
quantitative claims are plausible. (H)
When considering quantitative claims, it is useful to 
conduct a plausibility check. This can be done quickly using 
approximations and round numbers, and by establishing 
limits (minimum and maximum values that the number could 
reasonably be expected to take).
Application example: A politician claims that undocumented 
workers account for over half of the murders in your city. You 
check, and 34% of murder victims and 49% of murderers are 
under 25 years old. In your city, most undocumented workers 
are over 35 years old, and thus the claim seems implausible.
I. Thinking Critically
Introduction to HCs
Examples
=== PAGE 6 ===
6
B. Analyzing Inferences
Inference is the rational creation of new knowledge from old. It is broadly applied. One must 
be aware that even if a claim is correct, inferences made from it may not be. Formal logic 
provides a method for determining which inferences are valid and which are not. Inductive 
reasoning is about generalizations made from specific cases. Because many inferences 
are based on human observation, one must be aware of specific biases in human attention, 
perception and memory. And when drawing inferences about expressive works, such 
as works of art, one must appreciate the historical and cultural context of the work, its 
internal organization, and how individual experience shapes our interpretation of it.
#induction FA Formulate multiple plausible generalizations from 
available evidence, and consider how to use deduction 
to distinguish among the generalizations. (C)
Induction involves using evidence to support a conclusion, 
going from a set of instances or examples to a generalization 
about them. Importantly, strong inductive arguments do not 
guarantee the truth of the conclusion. Inductive reasoning is 
always biased in various ways. Applying inductive reasoning 
requires (1) being aware of the biases, and (2) considering the 
inducted generalizations to be only tentative conclusions, which 
must then be evaluated in their own right.
Application example: You notice that the stock prices for 
four software companies have increased. Based on these 
observations, you can induce numerous possible generalizations, 
such as: a) the value of all stocks has increased; b) the value of 
software stocks per se has increased; c) the local currency has 
lost value; d) all of these companies invested in a common asset 
that gained value; and so on. You now consider deductions to 
discriminate among the alternatives. For example, if it’s “a” and 
not “b” you should find comparable rises in other types of stocks.
Introduction to HCs
Examples
=== PAGE 7 ===
7
C. Weighing Decisions
Evaluating claims and analyzing inferences are important in part because they help us decide 
how to act. To make decisions rationally, one must analyze the alternative choices and identify 
their respective trade-offs. Decision-support tools can help us with such analyses, identifying 
and mitigating undesirable biases.
#utility CS Consider different types of future costs and 
benefits for all stakeholders. (H) 
When making decisions, one must always consider trade-offs 
between future costs and benefits and must consider them from 
the different perspectives of all stakeholders. When making 
decisions that affect people (as virtually all decisions in the 
real world will do), such reasoning must occur at multiple levels 
of analysis, ranging from effects on the individual to effects 
on groups at different levels of scale. Sometimes, a decision 
that maximizes overall benefits will be very unpopular with 
a subgroup; one must learn to anticipate and mitigate the 
negative effects of such cases.
Application example: You are about to hold an annual meeting 
and are hosting it at the hotel you’ve used for the past six years. 
You have already printed the invitations and coordinated with 
the guests, speakers and nearby restaurants. A week before the 
date, you receive a letter from the hotel manager informing 
you that he has to charge you three times what he charged 
you the previous year. You consider the costs and benefits 
for each stakeholder of staying the course and holding the 
meeting at this hotel: For yourself, the costs are severe; you 
won’t be able to cover your expenses. The benefits are that 
you are familiar with the venue and wouldn’t have to redo all 
of the invitations and arrangements. For the attendees, the 
costs would be a larger registration fee while the benefits 
Introduction to HCs
Examples
=== PAGE 8 ===
8
are clarity in the arrangements and a familiar venue. For the 
hotel manager, the costs include losing you as a client and the 
benefits are increased revenue — which would be limited to 
this one upcoming meeting (you definitely won’t meet there 
the following years). Presenting all of this to the hotel manager 
results in a useful negotiation, where he only increases the 
amount by 50%. (Based on a chapter from How to Win Friends 
and Influence People by Dale Carnegie.)
Introduction to HCs
Examples
=== PAGE 9 ===
9
A. Facilitating Discovery
There are no recipes or set of rules for how to make new discoveries. However, certain 
practices can set the stage, facilitating discovery. Among such practices are the 
ability to create well-formed hypotheses, predictions and interpretations of data. In 
addition, research methods can be used effectively to increase the likelihood of 
making a new discovery. Finally, one can facilitate discovery by considering systems 
at multiple levels of analysis and identifying the type of system being studied.
#modeltypes  EA Recognize how models can be used to explain a 
set of data and generate new predictions. (C)
Many kinds of models (ranging from conceptual to physical 
to mathematical to simulation) are used in science. A theory 
generally guides the construction of a model, indicating which 
aspects of a model are relevant. Models are used to explain data 
or to test a theory, often through visualization. One can vary 
the nature of inputs to a model and the specific constraints 
on its behavior and then observe how the model behaves (e.g., 
simulations can be run in specific circumstances and the 
results observed) —thereby deriving new predictions for how 
the phenomena in question should change when subjected to 
those inputs and constraints.
Application example: You’ve been getting a stomachache 
after eating at home. You notice that the sponge you use to 
wipe your dishes is always wet. You think about the germ 
II. Thinking Creatively
Introduction to HCs
Examples
=== PAGE 10 ===
10
theory of disease and hypothesize that soap and hot water 
only kill some bacteria — leaving the survivors to have lots 
of offspring. If so, perhaps you are infecting yourself by 
wiping the dishes with that sponge. You think about how to 
model this, and realize that to model the situation you need 
to know how quickly bacteria breed, how susceptible they 
are to soap and hot water, how sensitive humans are to their 
effects, and various other factors; without knowing these 
details, you really aren’t in a position to test your hypothesis.
B. Solving Problems
A problem occurs when there is an obstacle en route to a goal. When first encountering a 
problem (when no known solution is available), one must use creative thinking to solve it. Often 
such creative thinking relies on using specific heuristics (rules of thumb) and techniques. 
However, solving problems effectively requires one to be aware of biases and to mitigate their 
effects when they interfere with reaching a good solution.
#constraints  EA Identify and apply constraint satisfaction 
as a way to solve problems. (C)
A problem exists when one or more obstacles to a goal must be 
addressed. Obstacles often cannot be overcome easily, in large 
part because there are constraints on what sorts of actions 
are possible or realistic. Constraints are requirements on the 
solution; they do not determine it, but do place boundaries on 
what is possible. Thus, part of solving a problem is to identify 
the constraints on what can be done. If the constraints are well-
defined, problems often can be solved by devising ways to satisfy 
all of the constraints at the same time (this approach to problem 
solving is known as “constraint satisfaction”).
Application example: You are moving into a new house and need 
to decide where to put the furniture in your bedroom. You have 
Introduction to HCs
Examples
=== PAGE 11 ===
11
an old sofa, which is missing a rear leg and sits on a telephone 
book — and so you don’t want to put it in a location where it can 
be seen from behind (this is a constraint). You also have an old 
bed, with a headboard that must lean against the wall (another 
constraint). And you have two end tables, which must be set 
to either side of the headboard. And a large chair and reading 
lamp, which must be near each other. Once you pick a wall for 
the headboard, the positions of the other pieces of furniture 
may be determined; there is only one other place where the wall 
can accommodate the headboard and once it and the end tables 
are set up, there is only one other place large enough for the 
chair and lamp. The mere act of satisfying all of the constraints 
simultaneously almost dictates the solution to the problem!
C. Creating Products, Processes and Services
Various methods and techniques can help one to create new products, processes 
and services. Such methods and techniques include iterative design thinking, 
application of principles of perception and cognition, and reverse engineering.
#designthinking  MC Apply iterative design thinking to conceive 
and refine products or solutions. (H)
Great work rarely springs fully formed in a first draft. Thus, 
iteration, using design principles at every cycle, is typically 
required to produce a good product or the best solution to a 
problem. An iterative design process gives one’s efforts greater 
reach and impact.
Application example: You’ve learned that design thinking 
involves first defining the problem, then thinking of possible 
solutions, prototyping the solutions, and testing the results —
and then iterating until a satisfactory solution is achieved. With 
this process in mind, you design a poster to announce a concert. 
Introduction to HCs
Examples
=== PAGE 12 ===
12
You think about what will appeal to the audience and design 
a prototype. You show it to a few friends, who tell you that the 
poster looks too cluttered, so you simplify it. You then notice 
that the colors clash, so you change one of the background 
colors. Doing this makes the lettering fade into the background, 
so you then adjust the size of the font. The final result is much 
better than what you had initially.
Introduction to HCs
Examples
=== PAGE 13 ===
13
A. Using Language Effectively
Most communication occurs through language, both spoken and written; thus, it 
is crucial that one know how to use language effectively to communicate.
#composition MC Communicate with a clear and precise style. (H)
Effective communication requires a clear and precise style that 
reflects the voice of the communicator and that is appropriate 
for the intended audience. Communicators should use the 
fewest words necessary (they should respect the principle of 
“parsimony”) and should select words carefully to be as clear as 
possible. Avoid passive voice, stilted diction, elaborate structure, 
and imprecision; write and speak simply, directly, and sincerely. 
Understand when to use paraphrase, quotation, or summary 
to incorporate necessary information smoothly into your 
communication.
Application example: You are visiting your aunt at her new house 
in the countryside. She leaves a convoluted voicemail about 
how to find her property, in which she tells you to drive on one 
road for “a while,” then turn “toward the property that just got 
sold,” and take a right at the Millers’ farm. You have no way to 
know which property was recently sold or where the Millers live. 
She then retracts some of her directions and suggests a detour 
around one road (you’re not sure which) to avoid construction. 
III. Communicating Effectively
Introduction to HCs
Examples
=== PAGE 14 ===
14
You realize en route that your cell phone’s battery is dead. You 
try to follow her instructions as best you can, but quickly get 
lost. You wish her directions had been clear and precise.
B. Using Nonverbal Communication Effectively
Nonverbal communication often plays a crucial role in how well a verbal communication is 
received. These elements of communication not only convey connotations, but color the entire 
message.
#multimodaldesign  MC Apply principles of perception and cognition in design, 
including those for oral and multimedia presentations. (H)
A large body of research has documented many characteristics of 
human perception and cognition, resulting in a set of principles 
that captures how humans organize and interpret what they 
see and hear. Products, ranging from simple graphs to complex 
devices, from teapots to tactile surfaces, should be designed to 
respect these principles; products that violate these principles 
are difficult for humans to use. These principles can be used 
both to evaluate products and to guide creation of new ones.
Application example: You watch people leave the building where 
Minerva has its headquarters. More than half of them try to 
pull open the doors, but the doors are designed to be pushed 
open as you exit. You look carefully at the door handles, and 
see that they are identical to the ones on the outside of the 
doors — which clearly invite being pulled. You realize that 
the shape of the handles encourages people to pull on them, 
which is inappropriate for a door that should be pushed.
Introduction to HCs
Examples
=== PAGE 15 ===
15
A. Negotiating, Mediating, and Persuading
Effective interactions with people require anticipating the effects of a particular message, 
registering the actual responses, and adjusting communications accordingly. Such 
dynamic interactions lie at the heart of negotiating, mediating, and persuading.
#negotiate CS Use a structured approach to negotiation 
to reach desired objectives. (H)
Effective negotiation involves give and take between 
stakeholders to reach mutually beneficial agreements. 
Negotiating successfully requires a structured approach, which 
includes clearly identifying interests, agreeing on a process, and 
being prepared to sacrifice some objectives to achieve others. 
Negotiators must prioritize objectives but remain flexible and 
open to compromise. Approaching negotiation as a structured 
process raises the likelihood of a successful resolution.
Application example: Your company has assigned you to 
negotiate the construction of a new factory in Asia. You can’t 
get anywhere if the city you are negotiating with doesn’t give 
you tax benefits. So, that’s your first priority. When that is 
settled, you go over the details. The city officials don’t agree to 
subcontract the cement work to the offshore contractor you 
prefer and they disagree on your choice of heavy machinery 
supplier. You are willing to concede the offshore contractor 
because the company they prefer has comparable pricing and 
IV. Interacting Effectively
Introduction to HCs
Examples
=== PAGE 16 ===
16
quality, but you know that only this specific machinery supplier 
has exactly what you need. By first making a concession about 
the cement work, they are more willing to take your offer 
and resolve the “small” detail of the equipment supplier.
B. Working Effectively With Others
Each of us plays many roles when interacting with others, sometimes 
acting as a leader and sometimes acting as a follower or team member. 
Specific behaviors and practices can facilitate such interactions.
#differences CS Recognize and leverage people’s different skills, 
abilities, traits, attitudes and beliefs. (H)
People differ in their skills and abilities as well as their traits, 
attitudes and beliefs—all of which affect how they interact with 
other people and their contributions to cooperative projects. 
Effective interactions rely on assessing such information 
about other people and framing interactions with them in a 
way that is compatible with their characteristics. In addition, 
although groups do benefit from having members with diverse 
viewpoints and backgrounds, it also is important to recognize 
the need for shared perspectives and values within groups.
Application example: You are trying to motivate two members 
of your team, Robert and Larry. Robert cares a lot about 
what other people think of him, and so you point out that 
everybody else on the team–and in the organization as a 
whole–will be grateful for his efforts. Larry, in contrast, 
doesn’t care much about what other people think of 
him, but cares a lot about “making a difference” in the 
world--and so when you talk to him you focus on that.
Introduction to HCs
Examples
=== PAGE 17 ===
17
C. Resolving Ethical Problems and Having Social Consciousness
The way one resolves ethical problems has a direct effect on how one interacts with  
others. One factor that should contribute to such thinking hinges on having social 
consciousness, which is a concern for others and the common good.
#ethicalframing  CS Identify ethical problems, framing them in a 
way that will help to resolve them. (C)
Ethical problems occur when an action or outcome conflicts, or 
has the potential to conflict, with ethical principles. In order 
to avoid or resolve such problems, it is necessary to consider 
different ways of framing the situation on the basis of the 
relevant ethical principles. Ethical theories provide a useful 
approach to framing ethical problems by providing coherent 
sets of principles to apply systematically, and to compare to 
alternative approaches.
Application example: Your organization needs to hire more 
people, and you aren’t getting enough applicants. You decide 
to give a bonus to all employees who bring in someone for 
an interview. An employee complains that this is a set-
up, inducing people to behave unethically: People will be 
biased to bring in their friends, even if they don’t think the 
job is right for them. You acknowledge that this is an issue, 
and revise the policy: Employees will get a bonus only if 
the people they bring in are hired and stay more than 3 
months. You also explain that you trust your employees 
to uphold their own ethics, as well as the company’s.
Introduction to HCs
Examples
=== PAGE 18 ===
Minerva Schools at KGI
1145 Market Street, Ninth Floor
San Francisco, CA 94103